--- 
title: Silverpeaks Classic
layout: post
s3-album: 2010-05-03-silverpeaks-classic
---


There's something special about being able to watch the sun for an entire day,
from sunrise to sunset. I experienced this yesterday when I, along with a
friend from work, decided to tackle a 25 km loop in the Silverpeaks, a range
just north of Dunedin. What was supposed to be an introduction to trekking in
New Zealand turned out to be a 15 hour epic, including night time scrub
bashing, and seat-of-the-pants navigation in heavy fog. Thinking about that,
perhaps this /was/ a good introduction to NZ trekking.


With the weather forecast on our side (fine and 14, with light northeasterlies
developing), the day started at 07:30, just before sunrise. The first leg of
the walk took us along the Silverpeaks Route, south of Green Hill and on to
Pulpit Rock. The views along the way were good, although sunrise was somewhat
obscured by a seemingly never-ending wall of head high scrub.  We reached
Pulpit Rock around 09:40, had a snack, and then continued to our next planned
stop at Jubilee Cabin. This leg involved descending the Devil's Staircase, an
aptly named ridge line which runs North from Pulpit Rock and drops into the
valley where the hut is located.


While descending, we passed a stream of trekkers who had stayed in the hut the
previous night - we were happy to be heading down, rather than up.  We reached
the hut around 11:20; I figured we were doing well, as the generally quoted
time to Jubilee Hut was around 4.5 hours. The weather at this point couldn't
have been better; the sun was out, the sky was blue, and there wasn't a breath
of wind. Jubilee Hut is quite modern, and is in the perfect position to
capture the glory of the mountains surrounding the valley. It'd be a great
place to stay on an overnight trip.


We continued on to the remains of the old Jubilee hut, and encountered the
first real difficulty of the day. The guide book I was following ('Dunedin
Tracks and Trails' by Anthony Hamel) mentioned a short cut which started
behind the hut remains. We bashed around for a while to no avail, so, with a
reasonable idea of where we needed to get (to the top of the hill on which we
were standing), simply decided to scrub bash our way to the top. An alternate
route would have been to descend back to the valley, and follow a fire trail
which slowly winds its way up the hill. The direct route probably took just as
long, but in my opinion was more fun.


Upon reaching the top, we rejoined the trail and made our way along the ridge
line with the aim of finding ABC cave, a local landmark. It was about this
time that, thanks to me, we made our second mistake. I hadn't looked at the
map closely enough, so failed to notice that we should have gone through a
gate to the right of the trail. As it happened, we followed the main trail,
descending all the way down into a very steep valley. The climb back up was
tiring, but thankfully short, so we made our way back to the gate we had
passed and discovered an overgrown track which took us to the cave. Along the
way we met a group of three who had been camping at the cave, hunting
pigs. They were quite friendly, helping us to confirm that we were headed the
right way.


After poking around the cave, we climbed back up to the ridge line and
rejoined the fire trail. A very inconspicuous cairn signaled the start of the
unmarked walking trail which would take us back to Pulpit Rock via Rocky Ridge
and around Silverpeak no. 3. It was at this stage that I began to feel we
would be ending our walk in the dark, as the time had crept forward to 14:30,
giving us only 3.5 hours left until sunset.  The track along Rocky Ridge was
hard to follow and, in some parts, nonexistent. The dense vegetation slowed
our progress to the point that we would definitely have a couple of hours of
night walking. Despite this, I was confident that we would make it over Rocky
Ridge, and back onto the main trail before sunset.


Around 16:00 the northeasterly winds picked up, and some dense clouds began
making their way towards us. I became particularly concerned around 17:00 when
I saw the ridge line to the east become shrouded in these clouds, as we were
only half way along Rocky Ridge. The clouds hit us about 18:00, and the sun
left us 15 minutes later. We had been following what we thought was a track,
down into the valley around the second to last hill, where the ridgeline makes
a 90 degree right hand turn to the west.  The track dead ended, and we found
ourselves in the midst of dense scrub about 50 metres down the side of the
valley, with night fast approaching and visibility reduced to about 100
metres. I am the type of person who worries easily, so I insisted that we
immediately push our way all the way back up to the top of the ridgeline.
I estimated we had about 10 more minutes of sight navigation before complete
darkness, and I really did not want to be stranded off track in the dark and
fog.


The push back up to the ridgeline took about 15 minutes; from the top we could
just make out the shape of Silverpeak no. 3 in the fog, so we started pushing
our way west. After a few minutes, and just in time, my partner miraculously
stumbled across a track, so we excitedly kitted up our headlights (it was
nighttime by now), and started following the track. It was a big relief when
we rounded a corner and found the 'Pinnacle', a vertical rock column which
told us we were only a few minutes from rejoining the main trail.  We happily
trekked along in the dark, retracing our steps from the morning, and
completely disregarding the track we were following - we were just happy to be
on the final leg of the journey.


This probably contributed to the third major mistake of the day (night?); we
reached Pulpit Rock, and mistakely walked down a track leading south west for
about 30 minutes. We only discovered our mistake by spotting a significant
divergence on the GPS (which I had fortunately started logging in the morning,
and had put in my pocket when the fog rolled over earlier). Discussing it
afterwards, we realised that we had both had our suspicions, as there were a
number of features of the track which we didn't recognise. I guess it's the
kind of mistake you make when fatigue and lack of concentration are playing
their part.


We turned around and plodded back up for what seemed like an eternity. It was
dark and late, and we both just wanted to get back to the car. We made it back
to Pulpit Rock around 20:30, and got back on to the correct trail. There was
more relief at this stage, but I found myself checking the GPS every few
minutes, as another mistake would have really taken its toll on our
morale. Finally, and without further incident, at 10:00 we reached the car, a
total of 14.5 hours walking, and a distance of 31 km. What a day.  I'm really
glad of two things - the first that we'd both had the foresight to pack
headtorches; they were invaluable - without them we would have spent the night
outside. Secondly, that I have a habit of recording my walks/rides on GPS -
this saved us from going too far down the wrong trail at the end of the night;
this was actually the first time that I've ever used the GPS for navigation
purposes. I suppose you can never be too prepared. If I were to do this route
again, it would be in the middle of summer, when the days are long, or it
would be an overnight trip.
