---
title: Pembroke
layout: post
picasa-album: 6153313129935563249
---

Claire and I had another great trip to Pembroke on the Spring bank holiday
weekend. We sneaked over to St. Govan's early on saturday morning before the
crowds arrived where I managed my first E3 onsight - the classic <a
href="http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/c.php?i=24764">Butcher</a>. It's known
to be a soft touch for the grade, but I was pretty happy with myself for an
8am climb. I managed another E3 later in the trip, the aptly named Amazon, at
the <a href="http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/crag.php?id=18624">Amazon
Wall</a> near Lydstep.


During another early morning raid at Trevallen on Monday, I unwittingly scared
myself silly, attempting a much more serious E3 called <a
href="http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/c.php?i=24859">Sunlover</a> (the
second photo is of Claire having a well earned lie down, at a ledge two-thirds
of the way up). It's a classic Pembroke testpiece, but I would strongly
recommend against climbing it unless you are very confident at the grade
(which I'm most definitely not, at this point in time). I managed to complete
it with one rest on a dodgy cam, but only by the skin of my teeth.


The UK grading system is a bit crazy - each of the climbs I've mentioned had
the same grade - E3 5c - but, where the first two felt to me like pumpy and
well protected jug-fests, the latter felt like a thin and technical death
route, and super-pumpy to boot!  Either the first two are way over-graded, or
Sunlover should be an E4. 


After a scary morning, I calmed my nerves in the afternoon by ambling up <a
href="http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/c.php?i=24673">Manzoku</a>, a classic
E1 at Stennis head. Then, on monday evening, we finished the trip with Claire
leading <a href="http://www.ukclimbing.com/logbook/c.php?i=43870">Riders on
the Storm</a>, an amazing HVS which involved a 20 metre horizontal traverse
just a few metres above the sea.


I can't wait for the next trip to Pembroke, but I think I'll be choosing my
next E3 a bit more wisely. 