---
title: Spain
layout: post
picasa-album: 6145497220923123489
---

Claire and I just got back from a Spanish climbing trip in the Costa Blanca
region. We brought the trad rack and half ropes over, but ended up sport
climbing for the entire week.  We stayed in a <a
href="http://abdet.com/accommodation-costa-blanca">lovely house</a> in a tiny
village in the mountains north of Benidorm, and climbed in some beautiful
areas, the best (in no particular order) being Reconco, Bollula, Bellus, and
Sella - the shady Pared de Rosalia was my favourite crag of the trip, with <a
href="http://www.rockfax.com/databases/r.php?i=14301">Arte del Olvido</a>
being the standout climb.

I discovered that Benidorm is best known as a popular place for the British to
get extremely sunburnt and extremely drunk, whilst celebrating events such as
stag do's, hens' nights, and so on and so forth. The sunday morning return
flight was full of hungover Brits, and smelt a bit like a brewery.

My vague aim for the trip was to onsight a 7a (about 23ish in Australian
terms). I didn't manage this, but <a
href="http://www.rockfax.com/databases/r.php?i=53555">each</a> <a
href="http://www.rockfax.com/databases/r.php?i=53986">of the</a> 7a's I did
try I got second go, and I did manage to onsight quite a few 6c+'s. So I was
pretty happy with my efforts.

Spain is great - the people are friendly, the weather is warm (too warm for
me), the coffee is good and the wine is cheap. San Miguel is an excellent hot
weather beer, too. We didn't end up figuring out why so many people were
drinking beer at 10am each morning, but I did discover that real tapas is much
simpler than the stuff you get in those fancy tapas bars - it has a real
home-cooked feel to it. Good stuff.